you
right well hello everybody this is a
lecture from my introduction to
astronomy course series about neutron
stars
we have to understand the origins of the
strange beasts called neutron stars and
they begin really with the lifecycle of
very very large ordinary stars really
massive stars when you have stars that
have masses of greater than about 10
times the mass of our Sun the process of
nuclear fusion that powers stars runs on
beyond the first stage of converting
hydrogen the simplest element symbol H
into the next element helium symbol AG
and on to building the heavier elements
that converts helium to carbon and then
neon and then you get oxygen and silicon
and finally you get iron and each of
those steps releases another round of
energy but it becomes less and less
efficient as things go on the first step
is the most energy releasing of all has
the hydrogen to helium step and for a
large star the process might last 7
million years as we see in the time
scale box while it's consuming burning
hydrogen then burning helium will buy it
another 500,000 years half a million
years Carbon only buys it six hundred
years
neon burning one year oxygen burning
turning oxygen into the next step up the
ladder just six months and then silicon
that's formed from oxygen one day and
then what happens is the silicon is
converted on up you get to iron and
beyond and you can't make any more
energy come out you can make heavier
elements but they cost you energy
instead of releasing it
and the result of that is that the star
is out of options
as regards releasing energy and it needs
to release energy in order to support
its enormous weight against gravity and
so the core can't hold up under the
pressure anymore and collapses downwards
and you get is a supernova here's a
picture of the Crab Nebula which is a
star that exploded in the year 1054 ad
was observed by chinese astronomers in
that year now that final step of the
iron core collapse is very rapid indeed
it only takes a milli second for the
core to collapse inwards but that inward
collapse is halted because the iron is
converted from ordinary nuclear matter
into a solid ball of neutron particles
and the rest of the material that then
is falling down unsupported because the
core has collapsed gets heated by the
release of gravitational energy and then
suddenly comes to a rather rude shock
when it hits this solid ball of neutrons
that is formed in the centre and that
creates a rebounding shockwave which
blows the star apart and you see the
results there of the material still
expanding outwards
here's animation showing that's still
expanding nature of the Crab Nebula and
we can work backwards from this to rip
really back to the year 1054 when the
huge explosion was seen
if we look into the middle of the Crab
Nebula with x-ray telescopes we overlay
that on top of the optical image that
we've got here we reveal what's going on
in the center which is the whirling
swirling mass of hot gas at temperature
of about a million degrees coming from a
very tiny spinning object right in the
center there and that is the neutron
star this ball of neutrons that was left
that was created in the enormous
implosion of the collapsing star and you
can even see how it's swirling around
there and shooting Jets of material away
from its poles these stars really are
tiny this is an artist's impression of
one compared to Manhattan Island
so there's only about ten kilometers in
diameter but might have the mass of the
Sun or even twice the mass of the Sun
compressed into that volume a teaspoon
would weigh about five trillion tons if
you had a teaspoon full of neutron
matter and the neutrons were formed
because the electrons and the protons
that made up the ordinary atoms and the
ordinary material got crushed together
to form these neutrons so let's just
have a little look gray matter is made
of you and I and the matter we see
around us is made of atoms and the atoms
of each element are different and they
give the differences to their physical
and chemical properties do you have a
nucleus in the center and you have a
cloud of electrons going around the
outside the electrons are negatively
charged and the nucleus that's
attracting them has positive charge it's
the number of electrons and their
distribution in their orbits that gives
the atom its outward chemical properties
but most of the mass comes from the
heavy nuclear particles in the center
there the protons
the neutral neutrons that go with them
Oh
ordinary matter has these atoms and they
can be packed together in different ways
you could have a solid where the atoms
are so closely packed together that they
can do very little but jostle each other
or you can have a liquid where they're a
little bit more free to move they're not
held together quite so tightly and so
they have enough energy to squeeze
through and change the shape of the
overall liquid so it can flow and fill
up a container and that sort of thing if
you heat it some more you break all the
bonds that are holding the individual
atoms together and you form a gas and so
the air around us is made of gas
molecules and gas atoms that are flying
around largely independently bumping in
and bouncing off each other in a very
chaotic unstructured way but if you keep
on heating a gas then you put enough
energy in that those collisions are
violent enough to strip the electrons
away from the nucleus of the atoms and
you end up with a soup of the nuclear
cause containing the positive charges
the protons within neutral partners the
neutrons and a cloud of electrons flying
around not actually associated with any
particular atom that's called a process
of ionization and if you completely
ionized a gas then we call it a plasma
and the toy things that you see the
picture of at the top there plasma balls
are created like that they have a thin
gas which they heat with electricity and
it creates a plasma now that prompts and
different isotopes of different elements
that we have around us in ordinary
matter are determined by what the
composition is of the atomic nucleus so
for the simplest element hydrogen it
comes in three forms with one proton the
red balls there
one proton and one Neutron the heavier
version of hydrogen that we sometimes
call deuterium and an even heavier
version with three particles in the
nucleus one proton and two neutrons but
in each case the number of positively
charged particles is one and so it's
associated with one electron that orbits
around it and it's three different
versions of the simplest element
hydrogen moving to the middle of the
screen we have helium and you can have
two versions of helium two isotopes
helium 3 and helium 4 they both have two
positively charged protons but one has
one Neutron and one has two and of
course orbiting around them you would
usually find them with two electrons and
then we've got the next element lithium
three protons in each case and it comes
as lithium six where there are three
neutrons and lithium-7 where there's an
extra Neutron making a total of four and
again three electrons to balance the
three protons in the nucleus and so it
goes on up through beryllium and boron
carbon nitrogen oxygen all the way up
through the periodic table just keep
adding one more proton each time and a
balancing number of one or more neutrons
just to keep the protons from being too
tightly packed together because after
all they are positively charged so they
do tend to repel each other in these
heavier nuclei and a cloud of electrons
to make up the electrical neutrality but
back to neutron stars so a neutron star
is made of what we call
neutron-degenerate matter and under the
enormous pressure of the implosion of a
supernova what happens is that the
electrons in shown here in green and the
protons of the atomic nucleus of the
material that you've got in your star
get rammed together so tightly that they
combine and the positive and negative
charges cancel out
get left with a neutron and so the
center of the crushed core just ends up
as tightly packed neutrons you might
consider this to be element number zero
it has no protons and it's like one
giant atomic nucleus in fact the density
of a neutron star is about 10 to the
power 18 kilograms per cubic meter is
the same as the density of a nucleus so
those neutrons are packed really tightly
together in the center and we ask
ourselves why don't they collapse any
further well gravity is squeezing in all
right when these things are very very
dense a very powerful gravity but the
pressure of all those neutrons being
rammed together is what stops it and the
quantum rules of the game that neutrons
play limits them from falling in any
further they don't like to pack together
more tightly than a certain limit we'll
talk about that in a moment and that's
able to resist the pressure of gravity
up to a limit of around three times the
mass of the Sun looking at that in more
detail we talked about neutrons in boxes
the little boxes you can imagine at the
bottom of the diagram here have some
neutrons in them imagine those as little
volume cubes making up the space that is
allocated to our object our neutron star
in the making and as you apply pressure
the and you give things a kick the
neutrons can move around there's a
couple of gaps in the bottom there
they're free to move they can also move
to the higher boxes and those represent
higher energy states so if you give them
extra energy they can climb up into
higher energy positions but of course
they're forcing them to go up there will
create resistance so what happens in the
collapse of a neutron star is that the
pressure of gravity compresses the
object so there are very few low energy
states left and it's a law of quantum
mechanics that you can't put more than
one Neutron in each box and so they're
forced to occupy the higher energy boxes
they stack up on top of each other in a
tower of energy and forcing them into
those high energy states creates that
resistance that pressure that resists
gravity and stops them from collapsing
any further and that's okay up to a
limit of around about three solar masses
and then you hit what's called the
Tollman Oppenheimer volkov limit these
three scientists calculated exactly what
the limit was for packing neutrons
together because those energy states get
increasingly closely spaced and so
eventually gravity wins and you can't
resist it anymore by stacking the
neutrons higher and higher up the energy
Tower the that process becomes less
efficient and so what will happen then
is that we think gravity will take over
gravity runs away without limits and you
get a black hole but we're not going to
talk
black holes in this video that would be
the subject of a whole new one so we'll
talk about neutron stars and the proof
that these things existed came in 1967
when Professor as she is now Jocelyn
Bell Burnell was doing her PhD work here
in Cambridge and was using the IPS nine
acre array which is shown at the bottom
right hand corner of the screen there
looks like someone's growing hops in a
large field it's just an array of poles
with wires strung between them and this
was scanning the sky looking for
fluctuations in how the Sun's corona was
emitting radio waves but what Jocelyn
found was a series of regular blips and
when we say regular we mean very very
regular indeed they were coming in at an
interval at 1.337 three seconds regular
as clockwork and she dubbed this lgm1
for little green men signal one because
it seemed too regular to not be an
artificial signal sound you're hearing
there in the background is the sound
made from those regular blips coming in
from a pulsar a rotating neutron star
these things spin around and as the
magnetic field whips up the electrons
radio waves are emitted some of them
come our way as the neutron star in the
center spins and for each spin we hear a
pulse of radio waves one of these clicks
isn't long before other pulses were
discovered here's another one clicking a
bit more slowly and you can see the
graph of the pulses coming in there but
some Pulsar go at incredibly high speeds
here's another one this one's spinning a
hundred and seventy four times a second
now sometimes the neutron stars are
formed in pairs a lot of stars are
formed in pairs or multiple systems and
when you end up with two neutron stars
that are close to each other as a result
of a pair of massive stars that have
been through their life cycles and
exploded leaving their dead Neutron
cause behind they will spiral into each
other because their immense gravity
means that they shed energy through
emitting gravity waves one of the
predictions of Einstein's theory of
relativity and we've measured this now
using the LIGO interferometer it's a
gravity wave observatory that picks up
the shock waves coming from these
disturbances in space-time and it's
picked up the merger of a pair of
neutron stars and when that happens the
two neutron stars themselves might both
be below that Tolman Oppenheimer volkov
limit of three solar masses but the
combination of the two may well exceed
it and the result is there
there's an enormous detonation we call
these kilo Novus and they've only
recently realized just how common these
are and perhaps these are accounting for
a very substantial proportion as many
much as 95% of the supernova explosions
that we see in giant elliptical galaxies
may well be these collisions of neutron
stars and in the process a huge flux of
neutrons gets liberated and that can
smash into the any remaining matter and
add more and more nuclear particles to
the nuclei of those elements building
heavier and heavier ones and this can
build all of the elements up to things
like gold and lead and uranium that
don't get formed in the cause of their
progenitor giant stars remember the
giant stars only make elements up as far
as iron in their core that's only
element number 26 uranium is number 92
and so there's a whole lot of elements
that get formed in these much more
violent situations and it's probably
about half from the supernova explosion
itself and then another 50% if the
neutron stars colliding with each other
and they explode and in the chaos and
the fireball of the explosion these
heavier elements get made so thank you
very much at the end of the talk about
neutron stars we'll be talking about
black holes and other exotic objects in
future videos thank you